---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2021-05-12
title: Getting on the Web - Part 2
daynum: 14
coursedate: "May 12, 2021"
tags:
  - classnotes2021
---

Today we'll complete the process of setting up a [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) site to host our team project.

We began the process during last class by having each team migrate their project repositories to a new GitHub [organization](https://docs.github.com/en/organizations). Using an organization account to host each team's site allows us to avoid tying the URL of the project to the personal account of any one team member.

When creating a new organization, pick a short but meaningful name that clearly communicates the nature of your project. This name will also appear in the subdomain of your project. For example, an organization called `SuperfundSearch` will end up with the following GitHub Pages URL: https://superfundsearch.github.io

Here are a few other steps to follow:

* Name (or rename) the repo that will host the site using the following convention: `<orgname>.github.io`, where `<orgname>` exactly matches the Organization name and is lower case.
* Configure the site to serve from the:
  * `main` branch
  * root of the project (as opposed to the `docs/` folder)

With the above setup, the "entry point" to your site (e.g.  `index.html`), should go in the root of the repository.

Further, this makes `main` your "production" branch. Any code pushed to or merged into `main` will be live to the world. If you'd prefer to use an alternative branch to serve your website (e.g.  a branch called `production`), that's fine as well. Some folks prefer that approach since it leaves `main` free for use as the team's primary workspace (though you *are* developing branches, right?).
