---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2019-04-25
title: Design Thinking guest lecture
daynum: 8
coursedate: "April 25, 2019"
tags:
  - classnotes
---

## Design Thinking

Today we'll have a guest lecture on Design Thinking by [Maureen Linke](https://twitter.com/Maureenlinke), Graphics Editor at the Wall Street Journal.

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vTq0NPbQj2i-Vrdk3irJK0qtLVkozxi7x2Hztve3o3Q3WXXDUDmFqzWBqz3IBxAYisCT-2Xm1qCFb8L/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="100%" height="569" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>

## Class Exercise

### Round 1

Pair up with one person (someone who wasn't in your website design feedback group, if possible) and review each other's site designs or implementations. Review each other's work with a critical eye toward the four main elements covered in the guest lecture: 
* Proximity
* Alignment
* Repetition
* Contrast

What aspects of your design hew to these principles? What changes could be made to more closely reflect these principles? Please take notes on your discussions so you can present these thoughts next week, when we'll present our completed portfolio sites.

### Round 2

As a group, let's repeat the Round 1 exercise for this course's site design -- or lack thereof -- with the four elements of design in mind. Some questions to consider: 

* What improvements could be made so the site better aligns with the 4 principles?
* What interactive features or new pages should be added to make the site more useful? 

As the target audience for the site, this is your chance to help craft something more useful and usable for yourselves, so don't be bashful!

## Assignments

### Prepare to demo your website

> The in-class presentation of your website will be factored into the overall grade for Project 1. 

Complete the implementation of your website and be prepared to present your site on Tuesday, April 30th. The presentation should include:

* A demo of the key features
* A discussion of what went well and what proved difficult
* Mention of features or design elements that were left on the cutting room floor (and why)
* Thoughts on how well the design hews to the 4 principles of Design Thinking and areas for future improvement

{% include "bna/2019/assignments/js-ramp-up.md" %}