---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2020-05-07
title: Deliberate Teamwork
daynum: 10
coursedate: "May 7, 2020"
tags:
  - classnotes2020
---

> *No one can whistle a symphony. It takes a whole orchestra to play it.* ~ H.E. Luccock

## Reflecting on process

Team projects typically blend individual efforts performed in parallel, along with moments when team members come together to synchronize and integrate their efforts.

The proportion of work performed in these modes is often haphazard. A team meets on occasion to plan, then members return to their respective individual responsibilities. Between meetings, teammates may communicate directly with each other on areas of potential overlap.

This informal approach can work well when team members have a clear sense of their roles and responsibilities, frequently communicate important information, are open to change, and seek feedback on important decisions.

Absent such practices, team productivity can suffer as individual members experience any number of frustrations. Here are a few I've encountered:

- Confusion about what to work on
- Inability to finish a task due to being "blocked" by a teammate
- Performing unnecessary work
- Having to revise work because of unexpected changes by another teammate

Many of these problems can be resolved with improved communication. This quarter, we've explored a few agile software tools and strategies to help mitigate such issues, including project planning boards, daily stand-up meetings, and real-time communication (via Slack).

Let's take a moment to reflect on how these processes are (or are not) working for us, and what adjustments we might need to improve our team collaboration.

> Think about how your team has been working this quarter. How are you communicating and how often? Are you communicating in real-time (e.g. Slack and daily stand-ups) or asynchronously (e.g. email)? What topics are you talking about? Has the way you communicate changed over the course of the quarter? Is the way you're communicating working for you individually? How about for your team as a whole?

> Can you identify a moment this quarter when, had you or a teammate not communicated some critical piece of information, the project could have gone off track?

> What other patterns do you notice about your work as an individual and
> a team? Are these patterns helping you press forward or holding you
> back?

## Team roles

Imagine a newsroom project team made up of a reporter, data analyst, designer, web developer, and video/multimedia expert. These specialists may each be responsible for producing a particular type of content. But in order to create a coherent, well-rounded story package, they must synchronize and integrate their efforts.

Here are a few examples of how individual roles integrate through collaboration:

- A graphic or visual designer creates a mock-up, which a front-end coder implements in HTML, CSS, and JS.
- A front-end coder works closely with a back-end engineer to design JSON data that can support the design for a data visualization.
- The back-end engineer creates a data store (e.g. a relational database) and builds an API on top of it, which produces the JSON expected by the front-end developer.
- Multiple front-end coders work on client-side data visualizations related to the project, while another front-end coder builds a website that embeds the visualizations and ties them together into a scrollytelling narrative.
- The reporter provides a front-end developer with text for the narrative in the scrollytelling story.

These examples illustrate how a team of specialists can synchronize their efforts by playing complementary roles, and clearly identifying the people responsible for integrating individual contributions.

Below are some roles generalized from the above examples, along with a few others:

- Designer & Implementer
- Visualizer & Data Provider
- Front-end engineer & Back-end engineer
- reator & Integrator
- Researcher & Aggregator
- Free agent

Roles may neatly correspond to the appropriate specialist on a team, but it's also common for team members to wear multiple hats throughout a project.  A data visual expert may scrape a website to acquire their own data for a chart. A backend-engineer working with Django might not only be responsible for implementing an API, but also for adapting and integrating a teammate's front-end code into the web framework. A team lead may serve as a "free agent", filling multiple roles throughout a project.

Teams should discuss the roles each person will play. The process helps identify areas where team members will need to synchronize and/or integrate their work, as well as reveal opportunities to collaborate and share knowledge.

> Think about your own team and identify the role(s) you're playing. Are there any roles that are not yet being filled by you or your teammates which you expect will need to be filled? Will it be necessary to integrate the work each member is producing? If so, who is/are responsible for that integration work? How will it be done?
