---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2012-04-09
title: Project Beats and User Stories
daynum: 2
coursedate: "April 9, 2020"
tags:
  - classnotes2020
---

## Overview

Today, we'll form teams and choose a "beat." In traditional reporting, a beat reporter invests time in mastering a topic or area of coverage.

A crime reporter, for example, will routinely call police officials, district attorneys and leaders of neighborhood watch committees for news tips and commentary on breaking news. She will also have a solid grasp of the city's history of crime and enforcement efforts.

As news app developers, we're going to choose a "beat" as well. Within this beat, we'll try to put ourselves in the shoes of real people interested in or affected by our beat. We'll then try to identify ways we can help those users better accomplish their goals.

Here are some example beats related to COVID. They're intended to provide some specificity within the huge range of potential topics and issues related to the pandemic. The goal is to choose a "beat" that lets your team begin exploring the needs of specific users (i.e. the target audience of your app, tools, or graphics):

* COVID disinformation on social media
* COVID financial stimulus and small businesses
* Hospitals and COVID
* Collaborative COVID data gathering

A few important notes:

* If your team has already agreed on a specific project idea, you must still work through this exercise. Think about what "beat" your project idea falls into and give the beat a short name such as above. Then spend some time brainstorming other beats (perhaps in proximity to your current beat) that may also be interesting.
* If you're having trouble settling on a single beat, it's fine to choose more than one "beat" for now. We can narrow and refine our ideas in the next step when we discuss user types.

## Who are your users? What are their needs?

Once you've identified a beat, we're ready to start brainstorming ideas that can help real-world users better understand an aspect of our beat, or empower them to perform some action (or both).

Let's say your beat is Charity/Public Assistance during COVID. Try putting yourself in the shoes of people in need of assistance. What types of issues might they be facing?

* Delivery of groceries?
* Rides to health care providers?

To add some structure to this exercise, let's use an agile software methodology called [user stories][]. This involves writing sentences that follow the format:

[user stories]: https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management/user-stories

```
As a (role), I want (something) so that (benefit).
```

For example, for those in need:

> *As a person with medical conditions, I want groceries delivered so that I can reduce my exposure to COVID.*

> *As a low-income person without a car, I want a ride to my pharmacy so that I can pick up prescriptions.*

And don't forget about "users" who are in a position to help:

> *As a person with a car, I want to deliver groceries so that at-risk people can stay at home.*

> *As a person with spare income, I want to donate money for rideshare services so that someone else can go to the pharmacy or other important destinations.*

Ideally, we would invest a fair bit of time observing and interviewing people to identify challenges they're facing, and develop tools in collaboration with those users that most adequately address their needs. When possible, it's helpful to have "end users" write their own user stories.

While we'll initially brainstorm amongst ourselves, I encourage you to seek out opportunities early in the quarter to find real-world "end users" to provide ongoing feedback on your project.

## From user needs to software

So we have a basic handle on potential users and their needs. We can now start brainstorming ideas for how to enable our users to meet those needs.

Here are two examples of how news organizations helped connect those (literally) in need with people offering help (courtesy of ONA Weekly newsletter):

* Boston.com created [Boston Helps](https://www.boston.com/boston-helps)
* DMN put a [Be a Neighbor widget][] on their news articles

[Be a Neighbor widget]: https://www.dallasnews.com/help/product/fwddfw-connects-needs-and-helpers-during-coronavirus-crisis/

As a team, your job is to come up with ideas that can help address the needs of your users. These ideas may be quite general at the outset. For example:

> *We need a site that connects those in need with possible providers.*

Try to refine these ideas in a way that best meets the needs of particular users. This may require revising and further elaborating on user stories. For example:

> *As a person with a car, I want a way to sign up for specific hours during the day so that I can deliver groceries to those in need.*

Such a user story could serve as the basis for a website (or website feature) that allows people to sign up for shifts when they can deliver groceries.

## A word on project scope

It's quite possible that your team will decide that several types of tools, apps or graphics are required to address the user needs you've identified. That's perfectly fine. The goal is to identify a beat and user stories that allow you to make a meaningful contribution to a major project, one that is challenging enough to keep you learning and building for the next two months.

## Assignment 2

### Pick a team name!

As a group, select a name for your team. Feel free to have fun it with, but don't [bikeshed](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=bikeshedding) 😀. We want to pick a name and get cracking on our beats and user stories.

Once you've settled on a name:

* Open *Class metadata* spreadsheet (link is available in the syllabus page in Canvas).
* Go to the `teams` tab
* Add your team name to the `team_name` column

### Create a GitHub Project Repo

* Go to GitHub
* Create a new *public* project called **bna-2020-team-name**
* Add me (zstumgoren) as a collaborator

### Create a team Slack channel

Using the same name as your GitHub project, create a slack channel in our class workspace. 

### Project development

> Read [User Stories with Examples and Templates][] for more background.

[User Stories with Examples and Templates]: https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management/user-stories

* Create a shared Google Doc for your team called `Project Beat and User Stories`.
* Create an "editable" link for the document.
* Open *Class metadata* spreadsheet (link is available in the syllabus page in Canvas).
* Go to the `teams` tab
* Add the editable gdoc link to the `project_beat_and_user_stories_gdoc` for your team.

Flesh out `Project Beat and User Stories` so that it has the following sections:

* **Project beat(s)** - it's fine to have more than one if you're unsure which direction to go.
* **User stories** for your project beat(s) using the `As role...` methodology.
* **General software ideas** to address the user needs identified in the previous step. This may be a single unified platform with a variety of features, or perhaps multiple distinct tools, apps or graphics. There's no right answer on this front. The key is to think through, as a team, how to use technology to help address your users' needs.

**During our next class, each group will present and discuss their beat, user stories and software ideas.**

### Read about SMART Goals

Read one or more of the below to get a feel for SMART Goals:

* [Essential Guide to Writing SMART Goals](https://www.smartsheet.com/blog/essential-guide-writing-smart-goals)
* [SMART Goals 101](https://www.briantracy.com/blog/personal-success/smart-goals/) 
* [SMART Goals: How to Make Your Goals Achievable](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/smart-goals.htm)
