---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2012-04-14
title: Project Ideas and SMART Goals
daynum: 3
coursedate: "April 14, 2020"
tags:
  - classnotes2020
---


## Team presentation

Today, each team will present their project beats, user stories and initial ideas for software. This is an opportunity to refine ideas and user stories based on feedback from classmates. In addition, it's a chance for you to begin articulating the role each team member will play on the project.

Each team should choose present on the following:

* Project beat(s)
* User stories
* General software ideas to address the needs identified in user stories
* What role each team member plans to play

## A brief aside on roles

There are many specialties in the world of programming and data work. A "full-stack developer" is a rare thing, since it implies professional-level mastery of a wide range of skills:

* Server-side language(s) such as Python and/or NodeJs
* Data acquisition and analysis using a programming language
* API usage and creation
* Datastores such as relational databases and NoSQL data stores
* Cloud infrastructure such as Amazon Web Services
* The ability to design *and* implement "front-end" code (HTML/CSS/JS) and engaging user experiences

Front-end work alone entails a head-spinning number of skills, as detailed in the [Front End Developer Handbook 2019][], which takes a skeptical view of the ["mythical" full-stack developer][].

[Front End Developer Handbook 2019]: https://frontendmasters.com/books/front-end-handbook/2019/
["mythical" full-stack developer]: https://frontendmasters.com/books/front-end-handbook/2019/#3.7

## Areas of growth and mastery

This is not to discourage you from trying to learn many different skills. However, be pragmatic in how much you try to *master* at once. A good approach is to choose an area of growth and area of mastery. For example, let's say you have some basic Python programming skills and some basic HTML and CSS. An area of growth for you could be to begin learning Javascript to create dynamic web pages (e.g. dropdown menus and dynamic page elements that require calling out to APIs). Meanwhile, as an area of mastery, you may deepen your skills using Python to acquire data through web scraping and/or the use of APIs.

As you think about your SMART goals, try to identify roles or tasks that will allow you to grow new skills and deepen existing skills *while working toward your team goals*.

## SMART Goals

### Overview

So we have a basic sense of our users and some initial ideas on the types of software that we can build to address their needs.

Let's start pinning down some specific project "deliverables" by creating individual SMART goals. These goals should reflect the team's objective(s) as well as your plans for individual contributions to the team project.

Remember that SMART goals are:

* **S**pecific - This is your mission statement, and should reflect your contribution to the overall team project and your personal learning interests.
* **M**easurable - Provide a quantifiable way to measure if the goal has been reached.
* **A**chievable - Be ambitious but realistic. Create a stretch goal that will motivate you, but is not so difficult or complex that you feel overwhelmed. Sometimes it's difficult to know where to set the mark. Don't stress -- we'll take time throughout the quarter to reflect and adjust our goals.
* **R**elevant - Your goal should be aligned with both your own learning interests as well as your team's objectives (i.e. the beat and user stories you've defined).
* **T**ime-bound - You'll need a cut-off date for the goal (by the last week of class at the latest).

Below are some references on SMART goals if you need a refresher:

* [Essential Guide to Writing SMART Goals](https://www.smartsheet.com/blog/essential-guide-writing-smart-goals)
* [SMART Goals 101](https://www.briantracy.com/blog/personal-success/smart-goals/) 
* [SMART Goals: How to Make Your Goals Achievable](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/smart-goals.htm)

### Example

Here's an example of a SMART Goal:

> By the last week of the quarter, I will produce three different D3 data visualizations on the [Observable notebook platform](https://observablehq.com/) -- e.g. a map, bar chart and scatter plot --  that helps inform the public about the number of employees laid off in California due to COVID. These visualizations will provide content for my team's project website, which focuses on the economic impact of the pandemic, and will help develop my own ability to create bespoke, highly interactive data visualizations that are not possible with more generic platforms such as Flourish or Datawrapper.

### Create an Action Plan

With our SMART goals defined, we're ready to start fleshing out an individualized learning plan that we can follow to meet that goal. Here are the key steps:

* Identify, at a high-level, what skills or technologies you need to learn
* For each skill, identify specific resources to help you learn it
* Craft a daily/weekly plan of study for working through the resources

### GitHubify your action plan

We'll use [GitHub project management boards](https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-your-work-on-github/managing-project-boards) and [issues](https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-your-work-on-github/managing-your-work-with-issues) to flesh out and track our action items in a similar fashion to how we're using it to manage our team's tasks.

* Create a new **private** GitHub project on your personal account
* Create a `README.md` containing your SMART Goal(s)
* On the new project, create a project management board
* Go to the `students` tab of the class metadata spreadsheet (see link on syllabus in Canvas)
* Add the link to your GitHub project board to `github_personal_learning_repo` column
* Use the project board to create issues for all the skills you’ll need to learn to accomplish the SMART Goal.

When planning out your learning steps, you don't need to research and itemize every resource right away. Instead, start by getting the big picture down in some high-level GitHub issues. For example, if you're totally new to web development, a logical first step is to begin learning the fundamentals of HTML, CSS and JS.

Then focus on fleshing out the learning plan for the first skill on your list. Spend some time hunting down resources and simple exercises you can work through to help learn that skill. Then, using your project board "swim lanes", assign yourself specific action items by creating issues for each learning task. For example, you might have two tickets called "Work through the W3C tutorial on HTML" and "Complete CodeAcademy lesson on HTML". Each of those tickets should have links (in the body of the ticket) to the relevant learning resource. Drop those tickets into the `To Do` column of the project board and you've planned out your first learning "sprint."

## Assignment 3

> See above for more details on the process of creating SMART goals and a related action plan using GitHub.

* Write your SMART Goal
* Set up a personal learning GitHub repo
* Put your SMART Goal in a `README.md` file in your new learning GitHub repo
* Use your project board to identify the key skills and technologies you'll need to learn to execute your SMART goal.
* Flesh out the first week of learning by identifying specific resources that you will study or work on. These should be individually ticketed out using the GitHub project planning board and placed in the `To Do` column of the project board (this reflects the work you expect to complete over the next 7 days).
* It's great to create tickets for future learning (i.e. resources you won't get to in week 1), which can be helpful if you find resources you plan to study or review in the future. Just be sure to put them in a backlog column of the project board for future learning "sprints."
