---
layout: layouts/class.njk
date: 2025-01-15
title:  SMART feedback, Scrum and Wireframes
daynum: 4
coursedate: "January 15, 2025"
tags:
  - classnotes2025
---


## SMART Roadmap Review

Let's review [SMART Roadmaps](../../topics/smart_roadmap/) and finalize the plan for the next few weeks of study.

If you haven't already done so, you should add a GitHub Issue to your project board detailing your learning task for the next week.

> See [GitHubify your Action Plan](../../topics/smart_roadmap/#githubify-your-action-plan) for details.

## Daily "Standup" (aka Scrum)

The [Daily Standup][../../topics/daily_standup/], or scrum, is a key strategy for achieving tight feedback loops when building products, software, etc. When *used well*, it can help teams:

- stay in sync
- avoid wasted efforts
- identify challenges (and solutions) early

We'll review the basics of the Daily Standup and how it can help your team stay on track.

## Visual brainstorm - wireframe edition

We'll introduce the concept of wireframes and how they can help visualize your software ideas. 

Wireframing should be a fast and iterative process that let's you clarify the broad strokes of your site design and identify important questions and potential challenges.

Some key questions to keep in mind along the way:

- **Do you have an overall site "architecture"?** *If not, sketch one out
(e.g. multi-page, single-page, etc.)*
- **Are features tied to specific user stories?** *If not, circle back to your
user stories and update them.*
- **Have you considered the user's journey through the site, including how a feature or page section changes in response to a user interaction?** *It's critical to annotate wireframes with details on UI/UX and often requires more than one version of a wireframe for a given page or page section!*
- **Is data available to support the feature?** *If you're unsure, keep the
feature for now but add a GitHub issue to research the data -- and
verify ASAP!*

> IMPORTANT: Wireframes are not meant to be perfect. They are a tool to help you think through your design. They should be quick and dirty, not polished and perfect.

